Write lecture 4 (#44)
tekknolagi/isdt: lecture-notes/2-vcs.md

CONTENTS: Collaboration with Git

You've done enough solo development. It's now time to start working with your

> groupmates on your project. In order to do that, you need to make your

Reviewer: Does "your project" refer to some abstract project, or is it a reference to the example (calculator) repository that earlier notes have been using as an example?

Author: abstract. if you have a 1-2 sentence intro that i can use to explain that i would be grateful

Author: cc @tchebb

Reviewer: What do you feel is missing? I think this is fine TBH.

repository accessible to the others somehow.

Git is pretty flexible about how repositories can be shared---after all, they
are "just files"---but the easiest and most common way to share is via a code
forge such as GitHub, SourceHut, or GitLab. These Git forges do a bunch of
stuff but the most important part is hosting a copy of your `.git` folder and
managing permissions. It's totally possible to DIY this with your own server
and software such as Gitolite (I used to do that for years), but these forges
*also* provide issue tracking and pull requests and other niceties.

> So you go ahead and make a repository on GitHub. Now you're in this weird

Reviewer: I'd like an extra sentence explaining why making a repository on GitHub is the correct next step here, and an explicit statement that new repositories on forges start out blank.

situation where you have a repository locally and GitHub has this blank
repository somewhere in San Francisco and you have to find a way to get your
code across the country. To do this, you need to add a *remote*.

### Sharing branches with others

A *remote* is a copy of your repository that is... somewhere else. It could be
the directory next door, it could be a big binary file called a *bundle*,
or---most commonly---it could be on someone else's computer[^xkcd908]
accessible over the network. These network remotes look like an HTTPS remote
`https://server.com/myusername/myreponame` or a SSH remote
`git@server.com:myusername/myreponame.git` or (less commonly) a Git remote

> `git://server.com/myusername/myreponame.git`. These days, `server.com` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`git://server.com/myusername/myreponame.git`. These days, `server.com` is often
```

> `git://server.com/myusername/myreponame.git`. These days, `server.com` is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
accessible over the network. Network remotes are referenced using URLs: common types are HTTPS (`https://server.com/myusername/myreponame`), SSH (`git@server.com:myusername/myreponame.git`) and (less commonly) Git's native protocol (`git://server.com/myusername/myreponame.git`). These days, `server.com` is
```

`github.com` or one of the other forges. These URLs specify the location and
protocol for how your local Git installation should make network requests to
the remote repository.

[^xkcd908]: See [XKCD 908](https://xkcd.com/908/).

> One repository can have zero or more remotes, though having one remote is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A repository can have zero or more remotes, though having one remote is
```

Author: maybe a local copy of the repo, since this config shit is local only

Reviewer: Fair point, but I still think it's fine to say "a repository"

Author: I said "a repository on your local machine"

probably the most common. To go from zero to one, you need to add the remote:

```console?prompt=$
$ git remote
$ git remote add origin git@github.com:myusername/myreponame.git
$ git remote
origin
$
```

(The name `origin` is convention and the default Git remote name; you could
call it `fred` or `lemonade` if you prefer.)

All this has done is make a little entry in your `.git/config` telling Git
where the remote called `origin` points. It does not make any network requests
or anything:

```console?prompt=$
$ cat .git/config
...
[remote "origin"]
	url = git@github.com:myusername/myreponame.git
	fetch = +refs/heads/*:refs/remotes/origin/*
...
$
```

> To see this information without digging into the configuration, you can also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To see this information without digging into the configuration, you can
```

If you had more remotes, they would also show up both in the configuration file
and in the output of `git remote -v`.

<!-- TODO(max): Figure out x-overflow -->
<style>
.sidenote {
    font-size: 80%;
    position: relative;

>     float: right;

Reviewer: Do we want to float this for narrow viewport? Won't that just allow other text to wrap around it even though it should be inline?

}
/* Wide viewport */
@media (min-width: 1400px) {
    .sidenote {
        clear: right;
        margin-right: -23vw;
        text-align: left;

        top: -3rem;
        width: 20vw;
        margin-top: 1rem;
    }
}
/* Narrow viewport */
@media (max-width: 1400px) {
    .sidenote {
        text-align: right;
        width: 100%;
        margin: 1rem 0;
        padding-left: 15%;
    }
}
</style>

<div class="sidenote" markdown=1>
  As another aside, this convention of the path being `username/projectname` is
  just that---convention. The server name and path name could be anything that
  the server chooses. In GitHub's case, though, separating out by username
  gives nice namespacing (same for the other forges).
</div>

> So you have a remote now. You can tell Git to write a local ref (in this case,

Reviewer: "Write a local ref" feels a bit technical to me. Maybe say "copy the local commits from on a given tag or branch" instead?

Author: Trying slightly different wording:

> So you have a remote now. You can tell Git to write a local ref (in this case,
> the `main` branch and the commits it points to) to the remote (in this case,
> `origin`) by using the `push` subcommand:

Reviewer: My concern here is that we don't say what "writing" a ref actually *does*, and I don't think the term alone makes it clear. I still think "copy" is a better verb.

the `main` branch) to the remote (in this case, `origin`) by using the `push`
subcommand:

```console?prompt=$
$ git push origin main

> ...

Reviewer: Worth showing real output here, I think.

$
```

To reduce the amount of typing, you can also use `--set-upstream`/`-u` one time
to mark `origin/main` as the default destination for the local ref `origin`.
This adds an entry in the `.git/config` file:

```console?prompt=$
$ git push -u origin main
...
$ cat .git/config
...
[branch "main"]
	remote = origin
	merge = refs/heads/main
...

> $ # Now you can do `git push`

Reviewer: Should also be a real example here

Author: i did it for -u origin main but not the latter, which will have the same output as the first

```

#### Remote tracking branches

Time for a light detour. Another side effect of a `git push` is updating

> *remote tracking branches*. These are refs that are the cached local view of
> the remote's state that you care about. For example, if you `git push origin

Reviewer: ```suggestion
*remote tracking branches*. These are local refs that cache the last known
state of refs on the remotes you've added. For example, if you `git push origin
```

example, if someone updated `main` on the remote, you can see their changes
(update your local `origin/main`) by fetching.

```console?prompt=$
$ git fetch

> cedar% git fetch

Reviewer: Fix prompt here

commonly) `merge`.

#### Rebase

You learned about rebase earlier, but for the sake of completeness and
repetition in learning, I'll show how I might incorporate the remote changes
into my local branches using `rebase`. First, we'll take stock of the situation
and reflexively type `git status` to see what's going on:

```console?prompt=$
$ git status
On branch mb-vcs-4
Your branch is behind 'origin/mb-vcs-4' by 1 commit, and can be fast-forwarded.
  (use "git pull" to update your local branch)
$
```

As expected, the remote has updates that we do not, so our local branch is
*behind*. The status message also notes that our local branch can be
*fast-forwarded*, which we talked about earlier as well. This is the easiest
case and is illustrated by the below diagram:

```
* a879406 (origin/mb-vcs-4) A shiny new thing, freshly downloaded
* 5e72155 (mb-vcs-4) My most recent local commit
* 2187cc4 My previous local commit
.
.
.
```

It's not the *only* situation we could be in, though. We could also have a
situation where the remote tracking branch has a new commit **and** the local
branch has a *different* new commit. In that case, Git will note that the

> branches have "diverged" and will not let you push to the remote branch:

Reviewer: I think it's a bit jarring to talk about `git push` at all right here, in the middle of a discussion of rebasing. I think it'd be better to talk about fast-forward merges first (`merge --ff-only`), then show how that fails in this situation instead of showing that push fails.

Reviewer: This comment still applies. I think talking about fast-forwards (`merge --ff-only`) before talking about rebase makes more sense, since fast-forwards are far simpler.

Author: turned into footnote

```console?prompt=$

> $ g push

Reviewer: Let's not use a `g` alias in the notes. Keep it simple and stick to `git`.

```console?prompt=$
$ git rebase origin/mb-vcs-4
Successfully rebased and updated refs/heads/mb-vcs-4.
$
```

This rebase command finds the *fork point* between the local `mb-vcs-4` and the
remote `origin/mb-vcs-4`. Then, it applies (cherry-picks) all of the remote
commits to the fork point. Last, it applies all of the local commits on top.

If there are no local commits, Git will choose to automatically fast-forward
the local branch to get it up to date with the remote branch. Otherwise, it
will go through the full rigamarole of applying commits one by one (making new
commits along the way!).

After you have rebased, you can safely push your (renewed) local commits to the
remote. That is, unless someone else has beaten you to the punch and pushed
even more commits to the remote. In that case, keep fetching and rebasing.

Note that this re-applying of local commits on top of remote changes
constitutes *rewriting history*. Some people find this very distasteful and
even ban it in their projects, preferring merge commits exclusively. The course
staff has a more moderate view of things: rewriting history is fine if it's a

> private, short-lived development branch. Otherwise, merge.

Reviewer: I don't think this is the right place to discuss history rewriting. It needs more than one paragraph to get sufficient nuance and honestly probably deserves an entire section. I've already written quite a bit on it in lecture 2, so I'd want the coverage here to build on what I say there instead of starting fresh.

Author: new section about incorporating main branch changes into feature branch and all associated problems

Author: are you doing this section in your section or should we put it in lecture 5 in the social practices part?

Author: Added TODO

remote. That is, unless someone else has beaten you to the punch and pushed
even more commits to the remote. In that case, keep fetching and rebasing.

> Note that this re-applying of local commits on top of remote changes
> constitutes *rewriting history*. As we have discussed before, some people
> find this very distasteful and even ban it in their projects, preferring
> merge commits exclusively. The course staff has a more moderate view of
> things: rewriting history is fine if it's a private, short-lived development
> branch. Otherwise, merge.

#### Merge

It's also possible to use `git merge` to reconcile local and remote changes.
Like rebase, merge also comes with ability to fast-forward, but that does not

> happen automatically; it must be requested with `git merge --ff` or

Reviewer: It definitely does happen automatically: `--ff` is the default. `--ff-only` is not the same as `--ff` and means that the merge should fail if a fast-forward isn't possible.

`--ff-only`.

We'll talk about `--ff-only` first because it's the most similar to what you
have seen so far. If you run `git merge --ff-only origin/branch-name`, the
merge will only succeed if it need not create a merge commit. That is, if the
local branch can be fast-forwarded to the remote, great. If not, noisily fail.

In the case where the two branches diverge (`--ff-only` would fail), you can
use `git merge origin/branch-name` to make a merge commit between your local
branch and the remote-tracking branch.

A middle ground is `git merge --ff`, which will try to fast-forward if it can,
and otherwise fall back to creating a merge commit.

#### Pull

> Now, we've talked about running `git fetch` and then either `git rebase` or

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We've talked about running `git fetch` and then either `git rebase` or
```

`git merge` to reconcile differences between local and remote commits. Running
two commands each time can be cumbersome, so Git provides a shortcut. We
mention the shortcut last for two reasons:

1. We want you to understand what is going behind the scenes; this combo
   command is not magical
2. The combo command can behave in unexpected ways, especially if you don't
   understand the underlying concepts

The command is `git pull`. Now, directly from the man page:

> Incorporates changes from a remote repository into the current branch. If the
> current branch is behind the remote, then by default it will fast-forward the
> current branch to match the remote. If the current branch and the remote have
> diverged, the user needs to specify how to reconcile the divergent branches
> with `--rebase` or `--no-rebase` [...].

> More precisely, `git pull` runs `git fetch` with the given parameters and
> then depending on configuration options or command line flags, will call
> either `git rebase` or `git merge` to reconcile diverging branches.

Now that you have both learned about remote tracking branches and refreshed

> your memory about rebase/merge, this may sound like absolutely no big deal. Of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
your memory about rebase/merge, this may make perfect sense. Of
```

course that's what it does, right? Why would it do anything else?

Unfortunately, most people who start off with Git start with a
`commit`+`push`+`pull` workflow and don't understand why things break when they
do, or don't understand why there are these funky merge commits sometimes. Now

> you know.

Reviewer: I'd elaborate more on what people's specific misconceptions tend to be, if you're going to mention it at all.

Reviewer: "Unfortunately, many people learn `pull` (and `push`) only as a black box that magically synchronizes a local branch to a remote one (or vice versa). Since much of the commands' behavior can only be explained by knowing the separate steps they take, those people risk an unpleasant surprise in all but the most simple branch states."

### `git clone` for making a local copy of a remote repo

You don't always start off making a local repo and then pushing it to a forge.
Sometimes, the project already exists and you want to contribute. To work
locally, you will need to download the repository using `git clone`:

```console?prompt=$
$ git clone git@github.com:tekknolagi/isdt.git
Cloning into 'isdt'...
remote: Enumerating objects: 2103, done.
remote: Counting objects: 100% (907/907), done.
remote: Compressing objects: 100% (274/274), done.
remote: Total 2103 (delta 685), reused 818 (delta 627), pack-reused 1196
Receiving objects: 100% (2103/2103), 4.08 MiB | 20.98 MiB/s, done.
Resolving deltas: 100% (1334/1334), done.
$
```

By default, `git clone` will create a new directory with the same name as the
repository[^clone-repo-name]. Then it downloads all of the objects from the
remote repository, and checks out the default branch.

[^clone-repo-name]: It comes with a heuristic to determine what that is, but

>     you can think of it as the last thing in the URL with the `.git` stripped.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    you can think of it as the last piece of the URL, minus a trailing `.git` or `/.git` if present.
```

#### Merge

It's also possible to use `git merge` to reconcile local and remote changes.
Like rebase, merge also comes with ability to fast-forward, and this will

> happen automatically unless disabled.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
happen automatically unless disabled with `--no-ff`.
```
